README.md, before:

# Efnafræðilesari

Gagnvirkur veflesari fyrir íslenska þýðingu á OpenStax Chemistry 2e kennslubók.

## 📚 Um verkefnið

Efnafræðilesari er vefforrit sem hannað er til að gera efnafræðinám skemmtilegra og aðgengilegra fyrir íslenska framhaldsskólanema. Lesarinn býður upp á:

- ✨ Hreinan og faglegann lestrargluggaglugga
- 📱 Sveigjanlega hönnun fyrir síma og tölvur
- 🌓 Ljóst og dökkt þema
- 🔖 Lesframvinda og bókamerki
- 🔍 Öfluga leitarvél
- 📖 Gagnvirkt orðasafn
- 🧮 KaTeX stuðningur fyrir stærðfræðijöfnur
- ♿ Aðgengilega hönnun (WCAG 2.1 AA)

## 🚀 Setup

### Requirements

- Node.js 18 or newer
- npm or yarn

### Local Development

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/SigurdurVilhelmsson/Chemistry-Reader.git
cd Chemistry-Reader

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Run development server
npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:5173](http://localhost:5173) in your browser.

### Production Build

```bash
# Build
npm run build

# Preview build
npm run preview
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
efnafraedi-lesari/
├── public/
│   └── content/              # Markdown content and resources
│       ├── toc.json         # Table of contents
│       ├── glossary.json    # Glossary terms
│       └── chapters/        # Chapter sections
├── src/
│   ├── components/          # React components
│   │   ├── layout/         # Layout components (Header, Sidebar)
│   │   ├── reader/         # Reader components (MarkdownRenderer, etc.)
│   │   └── ui/             # UI components (Button, Modal, etc.)
│   ├── hooks/              # Custom React hooks
│   ├── stores/             # Zustand state management
│   ├── types/              # TypeScript type definitions
│   ├── utils/              # Utility functions
│   └── styles/             # CSS and styling
├── DEVELOPMENT.md          # Development roadmap (6 phases)
└── Chemistry_Textbook_Reader_Specification.md  # Technical specification
```

## 🎯 Features

### Phase 1: Core Reader (Completed)

- ✅ Markdown rendering with KaTeX support
- ✅ Light/dark theme with persistence
- ✅ Responsive layout for all screen sizes
- ✅ Chapter navigation
- ✅ Reading progress tracking
- ✅ Bookmarks
- ✅ Custom markdown components (examples, notes, warnings)

### Phase 2: Study Tools (Completed)

- ✅ Settings modal (font size, font family)
- ✅ Search with Ctrl/Cmd+K shortcut
- ✅ Full-text search across all content
- ✅ Glossary system with 15+ terms
- ✅ Alphabetically organized glossary page

### Upcoming Features

See [DEVELOPMENT.md](./DEVELOPMENT.md) for detailed roadmap:

- **Phase 3**: Flashcards, quizzes, spaced repetition
- **Phase 4**: AI tutor integration, analytics
- **Phase 5**: Collaboration features, offline support
- **Phase 6**: Research tools, advanced accessibility

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: React 18 with TypeScript
- **Build Tool**: Vite
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS
- **State Management**: Zustand
- **Routing**: React Router
- **Markdown**: react-markdown with KaTeX support
- **Icons**: Lucide React

## 📝 Adding Content

### Adding a New Chapter

1. Create a folder in `public/content/chapters/`
2. Add markdown files for each section
3. Update `public/content/toc.json`

### Markdown Template

```markdown
---
title: "Section Title"
section: "1.1"
chapter: 1
objectives:
  - Objective 1
  - Objective 2
---

# Main Title

Content here...

## Subtitle

:::example
Example content
:::

:::note
Note content
:::

$$
Math equation here
$$
```

### Custom Markdown Blocks

- `:::example` - Styled example blocks
- `:::note` - Note/information blocks
- `:::warning` - Warning blocks
- `$...$` - Inline math
- `$$...$$` - Block math

## 🎨 Theming

The reader supports light and dark themes with automatic system preference detection. Theme preference is saved in localStorage and applied before first paint to prevent flashing.

### Custom CSS Variables

```css
/* Light theme */
--bg-primary: #faf8f5;
--bg-secondary: #ffffff;
--text-primary: #1a1a1a;
--accent-color: #2563eb;

/* Dark theme */
--bg-primary: #1a1a2e;
--bg-secondary: #16213e;
--text-primary: #e2e8f0;
--accent-color: #3b82f6;
```

## ♿ Accessibility

The project aims for WCAG 2.1 AA compliance:

- Semantic HTML (article, nav, main, aside, header, footer)
- ARIA labels for interactive elements
- Full keyboard navigation (Tab, Enter, Escape)
- Skip to main content link
- Focus indicators
- Alt text for all images
- Sufficient color contrast
- Screen reader friendly

## 🚢 Deployment

### GitHub Actions

The project includes a GitHub Actions workflow for automatic deployment to Linode:

```yaml
# .github/workflows/deploy.yml
- Build on push to main
- Deploy to Linode via SCP
- Reload Nginx
```

### Required Secrets

Set these in GitHub repository settings:
- `LINODE_HOST` - Server IP address
- `LINODE_USER` - SSH username
- `LINODE_SSH_KEY` - SSH private key

### Nginx Configuration

```nginx
server {
    listen 443 ssl http2;
    server_name efnafraedi.app www.efnafraedi.app;

    root /var/www/efnafraedi-lesari/dist;
    index index.html;

    # SPA routing
    location / {
        try_files $uri $uri/ /index.html;
    }
}
```

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **OpenStax** for the excellent open textbook
- **React** and **Vite** teams for outstanding tools
- All contributors to open educational resources

## 📧 Contact

Sigurður E. Vilhelmsson - [GitHub](https://github.com/SigurdurVilhelmsson)

Project Link: [https://github.com/SigurdurVilhelmsson/Chemistry-Reader](https://github.com/SigurdurVilhelmsson/Chemistry-Reader)

---

Gert með ❤️ fyrir íslenska nemendur

Commit message:

Add comprehensive CC BY 4.0 license compliance for OpenStax content
Implement proper Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license
compliance for the OpenStax Chemistry 2e translated content:

- Update LICENSE file to clarify dual licensing (MIT for code, CC BY 4.0 for content)
- Add detailed CONTENT-LICENSE.md with complete attribution requirements
- Update README with comprehensive OpenStax attribution section
- Add attribution metadata to toc.json
- Create ContentAttribution component for UI attribution
- Add full attribution to HomePage
- Add compact attribution footer to all content sections in SectionView

This ensures proper compliance with OpenStax's CC BY 4.0 license by:
- Crediting original authors (Paul Flowers, Klaus Theopold, Richard Langley, William R. Robinson)
- Linking to original work (https://openstax.org/details/books/chemistry-2e)
- Linking to CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
- Indicating modifications (Icelandic translation and adaptation)
- Maintaining same license terms for derivative work

README.md, after:

# Efnafræðilesari

Gagnvirkur veflesari fyrir íslenska þýðingu á OpenStax Chemistry 2e kennslubók.

## 📚 Um verkefnið

Efnafræðilesari er vefforrit sem hannað er til að gera efnafræðinám skemmtilegra og aðgengilegra fyrir íslenska framhaldsskólanema. Lesarinn býður upp á:

- ✨ Hreinan og faglegann lestrargluggaglugga
- 📱 Sveigjanlega hönnun fyrir síma og tölvur
- 🌓 Ljóst og dökkt þema
- 🔖 Lesframvinda og bókamerki
- 🔍 Öfluga leitarvél
- 📖 Gagnvirkt orðasafn
- 🧮 KaTeX stuðningur fyrir stærðfræðijöfnur
- ♿ Aðgengilega hönnun (WCAG 2.1 AA)

## 🚀 Setup

### Requirements

- Node.js 18 or newer
- npm or yarn

### Local Development

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/SigurdurVilhelmsson/Chemistry-Reader.git
cd Chemistry-Reader

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Run development server
npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:5173](http://localhost:5173) in your browser.

### Production Build

```bash
# Build
npm run build

# Preview build
npm run preview
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
efnafraedi-lesari/
├── public/
│   └── content/              # Markdown content and resources
│       ├── toc.json         # Table of contents
│       ├── glossary.json    # Glossary terms
│       └── chapters/        # Chapter sections
├── src/
│   ├── components/          # React components
│   │   ├── layout/         # Layout components (Header, Sidebar)
│   │   ├── reader/         # Reader components (MarkdownRenderer, etc.)
│   │   └── ui/             # UI components (Button, Modal, etc.)
│   ├── hooks/              # Custom React hooks
│   ├── stores/             # Zustand state management
│   ├── types/              # TypeScript type definitions
│   ├── utils/              # Utility functions
│   └── styles/             # CSS and styling
├── DEVELOPMENT.md          # Development roadmap (6 phases)
└── Chemistry_Textbook_Reader_Specification.md  # Technical specification
```

## 🎯 Features

### Phase 1: Core Reader (Completed)

- ✅ Markdown rendering with KaTeX support
- ✅ Light/dark theme with persistence
- ✅ Responsive layout for all screen sizes
- ✅ Chapter navigation
- ✅ Reading progress tracking
- ✅ Bookmarks
- ✅ Custom markdown components (examples, notes, warnings)

### Phase 2: Study Tools (Completed)

- ✅ Settings modal (font size, font family)
- ✅ Search with Ctrl/Cmd+K shortcut
- ✅ Full-text search across all content
- ✅ Glossary system with 15+ terms
- ✅ Alphabetically organized glossary page

### Upcoming Features

See [DEVELOPMENT.md](./DEVELOPMENT.md) for detailed roadmap:

- **Phase 3**: Flashcards, quizzes, spaced repetition
- **Phase 4**: AI tutor integration, analytics
- **Phase 5**: Collaboration features, offline support
- **Phase 6**: Research tools, advanced accessibility

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: React 18 with TypeScript
- **Build Tool**: Vite
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS
- **State Management**: Zustand
- **Routing**: React Router
- **Markdown**: react-markdown with KaTeX support
- **Icons**: Lucide React

## 📝 Adding Content

### Adding a New Chapter

1. Create a folder in `public/content/chapters/`
2. Add markdown files for each section
3. Update `public/content/toc.json`

### Markdown Template

```markdown
---
title: "Section Title"
section: "1.1"
chapter: 1
objectives:
  - Objective 1
  - Objective 2
---

# Main Title

Content here...

## Subtitle

:::example
Example content
:::

:::note
Note content
:::

$$
Math equation here
$$
```

### Custom Markdown Blocks

- `:::example` - Styled example blocks
- `:::note` - Note/information blocks
- `:::warning` - Warning blocks
- `$...$` - Inline math
- `$$...$$` - Block math

## 🎨 Theming

The reader supports light and dark themes with automatic system preference detection. Theme preference is saved in localStorage and applied before first paint to prevent flashing.

### Custom CSS Variables

```css
/* Light theme */
--bg-primary: #faf8f5;
--bg-secondary: #ffffff;
--text-primary: #1a1a1a;
--accent-color: #2563eb;

/* Dark theme */
--bg-primary: #1a1a2e;
--bg-secondary: #16213e;
--text-primary: #e2e8f0;
--accent-color: #3b82f6;
```

## ♿ Accessibility

The project aims for WCAG 2.1 AA compliance:

- Semantic HTML (article, nav, main, aside, header, footer)
- ARIA labels for interactive elements
- Full keyboard navigation (Tab, Enter, Escape)
- Skip to main content link
- Focus indicators
- Alt text for all images
- Sufficient color contrast
- Screen reader friendly

## 🚢 Deployment

### GitHub Actions

The project includes a GitHub Actions workflow for automatic deployment to Linode:

```yaml
# .github/workflows/deploy.yml
- Build on push to main
- Deploy to Linode via SCP
- Reload Nginx
```

### Required Secrets

Set these in GitHub repository settings:
- `LINODE_HOST` - Server IP address
- `LINODE_USER` - SSH username
- `LINODE_SSH_KEY` - SSH private key

### Nginx Configuration

```nginx
server {
    listen 443 ssl http2;
    server_name efnafraedi.app www.efnafraedi.app;

    root /var/www/efnafraedi-lesari/dist;
    index index.html;

    # SPA routing
    location / {
        try_files $uri $uri/ /index.html;
    }
}
```

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📄 License

This project uses dual licensing:

- **Application Code**: Licensed under the MIT License
- **Educational Content**: Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)

See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) and [CONTENT-LICENSE.md](./CONTENT-LICENSE.md) for complete details.

## 📚 Content Attribution

The educational content in this reader is an Icelandic translation and adaptation of **"Chemistry 2e"** by OpenStax.

**Original Work:**
- **Title**: Chemistry 2e
- **Authors**: Paul Flowers, Klaus Theopold, Richard Langley, William R. Robinson
- **Publisher**: OpenStax
- **Source**: https://openstax.org/details/books/chemistry-2e
- **License**: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)
- **License URL**: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

**This Adaptation:**
- **Translator**: Sigurður E. Vilhelmsson
- **Modifications**: Translated to Icelandic, adapted for Icelandic high school students
- **License**: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)

This is a derivative work based on the original OpenStax Chemistry 2e textbook. All translated content maintains the same CC BY 4.0 license as the original work. When using or redistributing this content, please provide attribution to both OpenStax (original authors) and this translation project.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **OpenStax** for creating and maintaining excellent open educational resources
- **Chemistry 2e Authors** (Paul Flowers, Klaus Theopold, Richard Langley, William R. Robinson) for their outstanding textbook
- **React** and **Vite** teams for outstanding development tools
- All contributors to open educational resources

## 📧 Contact

Sigurður E. Vilhelmsson - [GitHub](https://github.com/SigurdurVilhelmsson)

Project Link: [https://github.com/SigurdurVilhelmsson/Chemistry-Reader](https://github.com/SigurdurVilhelmsson/Chemistry-Reader)

---

Gert með ❤️ fyrir íslenska nemendur
